feat: add networkInterfaces configuration to launchTemplate (#3819)
aws/karpenter: designs/aws-launch-template-network-interfaces.md

  userData: "..."                         # optional, overrides autogenerated userdata with a merge semantic
  tags: { ... }                           # optional, propagates tags to underlying EC2 resources
  metadataOptions: { ... }                # optional, configures IMDS for the instance
  blockDeviceMappings: [ ... ]            # optional, configures storage devices for the instance
  detailedMonitoring: "..."               # optional, configures detailed monitoring for the instance
  networkInterfaces:                      # optional, configures network interfaces for the instance
    - associateCarrierIPAddress: false    # optional, Indicates whether to associate a Carrier IP address with eth0 for a new network interface.
      associatePublicIPAddress: false     # optional, Indicates whether to assign a public IPv4 address to eth0 for a new network interface.
      deleteOnTermination: false          # optional, Indicates whether the network interface is deleted when the instance is terminated.
      description: "..."                  # optional, A description for the network interface.

>       deviceIndex: 0                      # required, The device index for the network interface attachment.

Author: It is not required; it was documented wrong! I am correcting it in the docs

      interfaceType: "interface"          # optional, The interface type for the network interface. To create an Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA), specify efa

>       networkCardIndex: 0 

Author: optional, added a comment

      ipv6PrefixCount: 1                  # optional, The number of IPv6 prefixes that AWS automatically assigns to the network interface.
    - { ... }
```

subnet and securityGroup will remain part of the `AWSNodeTemplate` and will be used for both network interfaces.
in following iterations, as the `AWSNodeTemplate` move from `v1alpha1` to higher versions, we can add support for:

```yaml
subnetSelector: String
securityGroupSelector: String
```

this way we can support different subnets and security groups for each network interface, we can also remove the limit
of having only 2 network interfaces per LaunchTemplate.

The [drift design doc #366](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-core/pull/366) suggests classifying CRD fields as  (1) Static, (2) Dynamic, or (3) Behavioral. in this
context, the networkInterfaces would be classified as following:

|                                                                | Static | Dynamic | Behavioral |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|--------|---------|------------|
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces.length                       | x      |         |            |

> | AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces.order                        | x      |         |            |

Reviewer: Does the order in which network interfaces are defined define some priority on how they're being used? If so, then this makes sense to me, but otherwise, I don't know if we need to consider the order.

Author: Yea, the order does not change the way they are used. It is the device index that matters.

after reconsiderations, the order in which they are defined does not matter, we should only compare the network interfaces where the device index match

I think in this case it is better to add the validation to have unique value per device index in the `AWSNodeTemplate` (already enforced by AWS API but better to have the AWSNodeTemplate in a valid state as well)

| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].AssociateCarrierIpAddress | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].AssociatePublicIpAddress  | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].DeleteOnTermination       |        |         | x          |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].Description               | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].DeviceIndex               | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].InterfaceType             | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].NetworkCardIndex          | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].ipv4PrefixCount           | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].ipv6PrefixCount           | x      |         |            |

> since `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` is a list, Drift would be triggered if:

Author: > The initial design is to default the behavior to terminate and replace. Maybe this is a reasonable case to consider in-place as it would be its own subspec? Would terminate and replace be too unreasonable as a initial landing place for this design?

Agree, it is a reasonable case for the in-place update, but it was mentioned by the original design doc for drift as a no-go. I think it is still reasonable for terminate and replace, except for DeleteOnTermination ([reason](https://github.com/aws/karpenter/pull/3819#discussion_r1229400842)) which is marked as `behavioral`

- the number of network interfaces of the node does not contain the specified `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces`
- the order of network interfaces of a node do not match the order of `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` when sorted
  by `NetworkCardIndex` and `DeviceIndex`.

>   `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` do not define `NetworkCardIndex` or `DeviceIndex`, their values are assumed to

Reviewer: Sorry if I'm missing the point here, but I see that you've included both NetworkCardIndex and DeviceIndex in the specifications. Do you mean to add an if here? 
```suggestion
  If `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` do not define `NetworkCardIndex` or `DeviceIndex`, their values are assumed to
```

Author: yes, thanks for spotting it

kind: AWSNodeTemplate
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  subnetSelector: { ... }                 # required, discovers tagged subnets to attach to instances
  securityGroupSelector: { ... }          # required, discovers tagged security groups to attach to instances
  instanceProfile: "..."                  # optional, overrides the node's identity from global settings
  amiFamily: "..."                        # optional, resolves a default ami and userdata
  amiSelector: { ... }                    # optional, discovers tagged amis to override the amiFamily's default
  userData: "..."                         # optional, overrides autogenerated userdata with a merge semantic
  tags: { ... }                           # optional, propagates tags to underlying EC2 resources
  metadataOptions: { ... }                # optional, configures IMDS for the instance
  blockDeviceMappings: [ ... ]            # optional, configures storage devices for the instance
  detailedMonitoring: "..."               # optional, configures detailed monitoring for the instance
  networkInterfaces:                      # optional, configures network interfaces for the instance

>     - AssociateCarrierIpAddress: false    # optional, Indicates whether to associate a Carrier IP address with eth0 for a new network interface.
>       AssociatePublicIpAddress: false     # optional, Indicates whether to assign a public IPv4 address to eth0 for a new network interface.
>       DeleteOnTermination: false          # optional, Indicates whether the network interface is deleted when the instance is terminated.
>       Description: "..."                  # optional, A description for the network interface.
>       DeviceIndex: 0                      # required, The device index for the network interface attachment.
>       InterfaceType: "interface"          # optional, The interface type for the network interface. To create an Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA), specify efa
>       NetworkCardIndex: 0                 # optional, The index of the network card. Some instance types support multiple network cards. The primary network interface must be assigned to network card index 0. The default is network card index 0.

Reviewer 2: just some casing nits: 
```suggestion
    - associateCarrierIPAddress: false    # optional, Indicates whether to associate a Carrier IP address with eth0 for a new network interface.
      associatePublicIPAddress: false     # optional, Indicates whether to assign a public IPv4 address to eth0 for a new network interface.
      deleteOnTermination: false          # optional, Indicates whether the network interface is deleted when the instance is terminated.
      description: "..."                  # optional, A description for the network interface.
      deviceIndex: 0                      # required, The device index for the network interface attachment.
      interfaceType: "interface"          # optional, The interface type for the network interface. To create an Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA), specify efa
      networkCardIndex: 0 
```

      ipv4PrefixCount: 1                  # optional, The number of IPv4 prefixes that AWS automatically assigns to the network interface.
      ipv6PrefixCount: 1                  # optional, The number of IPv6 prefixes that AWS automatically assigns to the network interface.
    - { ... }
```

> in addition, we will only support two networkInterfaces per node, this way we guarantee that the node will be able to

Reviewer 2: can we remove this since we're going to leave it up to the user to make sure the instance types they specify can support the number of network interface they specify?

run on all instance types.

subnet and securityGroup will remain part of the `AWSNodeTemplate` and will be used for both network interfaces.
in following iterations, as the `AWSNodeTemplate` move from `v1alpha1` to higher versions, we can add support for:

```yaml
subnetSelector: String
securityGroupSelector: String
```

this way we can support different subnets and security groups for each network interface, we can also remove the limit
of having only 2 network interfaces per LaunchTemplate.

The drift design doc #366 suggests classifying CRD fields as  (1) Static, (2) Dynamic, or (3) Behavioral. in this

> context, the networkInterfaces would be classified as following:

Author: @jonathan-innis

I added this section about drift detection

|                                                                | Static | Dynamic | Behavioral |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|--------|---------|------------|
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces.length                       | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces.order                        | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].AssociateCarrierIpAddress | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].AssociatePublicIpAddress  | x      |         |            |

> | AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].DeleteOnTermination       |        |         | x          |

Reviewer 2: I think this should be static as well. This is describable via an EC2 DescribeInstances call: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/run-instances.html#:~:text=%22DeleteOnTermination%22%3A%20true%2C

Author: > I think this should be static as well. This is describable via an EC2 DescribeInstances call

True, I just thought it does not benefit much to have it. 
if the current instance has the value `false`, while the CRD changed to `true`. decommissioning the node for the drift will leave the networkInterface un deleted anyway. and vice versa. it makes more sense for an in-place drift fixing but this is not going to be supported.

Reviewer 2: ah I see your point

| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].Description               | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].DeviceIndex               | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].InterfaceType             | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].NetworkCardIndex          | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].ipv4PrefixCount           | x      |         |            |
| AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces[@].ipv6PrefixCount           | x      |         |            |

since `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` is a list, Drift would be triggered if:

> - the number of network interfaces of the node do not match the length of `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the number of network interfaces of the node does not contain the specified `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces`
```

- the order of network interfaces of a node do not match the order of `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` when sorted
  by `NetworkCardIndex` and `DeviceIndex`.
  `AWSNodeTemplate.NetworkInterfaces` do not define `NetworkCardIndex` or `DeviceIndex`, their values are assumed to

>   equal the index of the  `v1alpha1.NetworkInterface` object in th list

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  equal the index of the  `v1alpha1.NetworkInterface` object in the list
```

  networkInterfaces:
  - subnetSelector:
        subnet: subnet-2 # users expect this to be used for this specific network interface
    securityGroupSelector:
        securityGroup: sg-2 # users expect this to be used for this specific network interface
```
having both options (`AWSNodeTemplate` level and networkInterface level) will complicate the API and will cause confusion for the users. It shall also complicate the logic on karpenter controller side.   
In addition, removing the `AWSNodeTemplate`'s level subnet and security group selectors is a breaking change from API backward compatibility perspective.

one more thing to consider is that subnets are bound to a single AZ. that's why the resolution happen in runtime instead of being part of the AWS launchTemplate (to avoid creating as many launch templates as the AZs in the zone).
moving the resolution logic to the networkInterface level has the following complications: 
1. more resolutions and interface allocations to do
2. NetworkInterfaces can have conflicting requirements (e.g. different subnets in different AZs). which we need to handle in runtime.

> ## networkInterfaces with specific IP addresses

Reviewer 2: Agree on leaving this out!

I'm not entirely sure how this would work, but there is an ask for a selector on interfaceID such that you could assign an EIP, and could extend that to a NetworkInterfaceID https://github.com/aws/karpenter/issues/3899 

I'm not sure if Karpenter is the right place for that logic though, seems more like the CNI should allocate the EIP rather than Karpenter.

Author: There is no way to assign an EIP to launchTemplate. The best we can do is 

1. use a selector to select a NetworkInterface and assign it to the launchTemplate using [NetworkInterfaceId](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-launchtemplate-networkinterface.html#cfn-ec2-launchtemplate-networkinterface-networkinterfaceid); in this case the user will have to create the network interfaces and assign the EIP to them beforehand. Karpenter do not allocate EIPs in that case
2. alternatively, regardless of how the networkInterfaces are created (dynamically, or using a networkInterface selector to pick an existing interface); users can specify an EIP tag/selector that karpenter will use it to associate the EIP to the EC2 instance after it is created.

I guess 1 is more in the scope of this change, but it does not fully solve the problem for the user. they will need to pre-create network interfaces and associate EIPs with them.

in addition, the [workaround](https://github.com/aws-samples/eip-and-dns-auto-binding-for-karpenter-worker#solution-introduction) specified by the user in the above issue suggests more than just assigning an EIP which go beyond the scope of Karpenter

## number of network interfaces per instance type
the [maximum number of network interfaces a node can support](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/using-eni.html#AvailableIpPerENI) differs based on the instance-type. This creates dependency between the `Provisioner` resource and the `AWSNodeTemplate`.
for example if the provisioner allows the `m5.large` and `m5.xlarge` instance types, while the `AWSNodeTemplate` specifies 4 network interfaces, karpenter controller needs to know that it can only provision `m5.xlarge` instances.

## node drift
there are requirements to reconcile nodes as they drift from the specs defined in the provisioner resource as defined [here](https://github.com/aws/karpenter/issues/1738) and [here](https://github.com/aws/karpenter/issues/1457).
the topic of having multiple network interfaces per node adds to the complexity of the drift detection logic.

# Proposed Solution:
iterative approach where we start by exposing subset of the fields of networkInterfaces and then expand the support based on the demand.
those fields are:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: can you add this example to a minimal AWSNodeTemplate to make it clearer where this will live and that it's a list of this info?

Author: added

  AssociateCarrierIpAddress: Boolean
  AssociatePublicIpAddress: Boolean
  DeleteOnTermination: Boolean
  Description: String
  DeviceIndex: Integer
  InterfaceType: String

>   NetworkCardIndex: Integer

Reviewer 2: thoughts on exposing ipv4PrefixCount and ipv6PrefixCount?
Those seem useful to mitigate the need of the VPC CNI to allocate IP addresses at startup and gets a head start allocating IPs.

Author: added

```

> in addition, we will only support two networkInterfaces per node, this way we guarantee that the node will be able to run on all instance types.

Reviewer 2: I think for this case, we just have to trust the user to craft a provisioner and AWSNodeTemplate that are compatible. The 2 limit is safe, but it's limiting if you've configured your provisioner to only have c6i.48xlarge instance types or something like that.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I thin runtime errors are okay for the complex validation failures having to do with AWS APIs parameter combinations. Anything that we can validate in a straight forward way on the CRD is good, but I'd stop short of any complicated validations and definitely stopping short at any AWS API calls to perform validation.
